Restructuring ROS 2 Gem docs (#2266)
o3de/o3de.org: content/docs/user-guide/interactivity/robotics/concepts-and-components-overview.md

---
linkTitle: Concepts and Structure
title: ROS 2 Concepts and Structure

> description: Understanding basic concepts and structure of the ROS 2 Gem in Open 3D Engine (O3DE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Understanding basic concepts and structure of the ROS 2 Gem in Open 3D Engine (O3DE).
weight: 300
```

  - `ROS2RobotImporterSystemComponent`

See the [class diagram](/docs/user-guide/interactivity/robotics/class-diagram/) to understand how components are connected.

### Frames

`ROS2FrameComponent` is a representation of an interesting physical part of the robot. It handles the spatio-temporal relationship between this part and other frames of reference. It also encapsulates namespaces, which help to distinguish between different robots and different parts of the robot, such as in the case of multiple identical sensors on one robot.

All Sensors and the Robot Control component require `ROS2FrameComponent`.

### Sensors

Sensors are components deriving from `ROS2SensorComponent`. They acquire data from the simulated environment and publish it to ROS 2 domain.

- Each sensor has a configuration, including one or more Publishers.
- Sensors publish at a given rate (frequency).
- Some sensors can be visualized.

If you intend to add your own sensor, it might be useful to look at how sensors already provided within the O3DE ROS2 Gem are implemented.

### Robot Control

The Gem comes with `ROS2RobotControlComponent`, which you can use to move your robot through:

> - [Twist](https://github.com/ros2/common_interfaces/blob/master/geometry_msgs/msg/Twist.msg) messages.
> - [AckermannDrive](https://github.com/ros-drivers/ackermann_msgs/blob/master/msg/AckermannDrive.msg)
>   The component subscribes to these command messages on a configured topic. The topic is `cmd_vel` by default, in a namespace as dictated by __ROS2Frame__.

Reviewer: - It sounds like the sentence "The component subscribes..." applies to both Twist and AckermannDrive, but it's currently rendererd together on the website. I added some space to separate them. 
- Nit: Don't need a period for short-phrased lists
```suggestion
- [Twist](https://github.com/ros2/common_interfaces/blob/master/geometry_msgs/msg/Twist.msg) messages
- [AckermannDrive](https://github.com/ros-drivers/ackermann_msgs/blob/master/msg/AckermannDrive.msg)

The component subscribes to these command messages on a configured topic. The topic is `cmd_vel` by default, in a namespace as dictated by __ROS2Frame__.
```

> To make use of received command messages, use either `AckermannControlComponent`, `RigidBodyTwistControlComponent`, or `SkidSteeringControlComponent`, depending on the steering type. You can also implement your own control component or use LUA scripting to handle these commands. Unless scripting is used, control components should translate ROS 2 commands to events on `VehicleInputControlBus`. These events will be handled by a [`VehicleModelComponent`](#vehicle-model) if it is present. You can use tools such as [rqt_robot_steering](https://index.ros.org/p/rqt_robot_steering/) to move your robot with Twist messages. `RobotControl` is suitable to use with [ROS 2 navigation stack](https://navigation.ros.org/). It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this component.

Reviewer: In the future, the ROS 2 Documentation should also link to any scripting API that developers can reference, such as the Lua scripts.

```suggestion
To make use of received command messages, use either `AckermannControlComponent`, `RigidBodyTwistControlComponent`, or `SkidSteeringControlComponent`, depending on the steering type. You can also implement your own control component or use Lua scripting to handle these commands. Unless scripting is used, control components should translate ROS 2 commands to events on `VehicleInputControlBus`. These events will be handled by a [`VehicleModelComponent`](#vehicle-model) if it is present. You can use tools such as [rqt_robot_steering](https://index.ros.org/p/rqt_robot_steering/) to move your robot with Twist messages. `RobotControl` is suitable to use with [ROS 2 navigation stack](https://navigation.ros.org/). It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this component.
```

### Vehicle Model

`VehicleModelComponent` serves the purpose of converting inputs such as target velocity, steering or acceleration to physical forces on parts of a vehicle (robot). `VehicleModel` has a `VehicleConfiguration` which is used to define axles, parametrize and assign wheels. The model requires a `WheelControllerComponent` present in each wheel entity. It also uses an implementation of `DriveModel`, which converts vehicle inputs to forces acting on steering elements and wheels.

### Vehicle Dynamics

See the [Vehicle Dynamics](vehicle-dynamics.md) section.

### Spawner

> `ROS2SpawnerComponent` handles spawning entities during simulation. Available spawnables have to be set up as the component's field before the simulation. User is able to define named spawn points inside the Editor. This can be done by adding `ROS2SpawnPointComponent` to a child entity of an entity with `ROS2SpawnerComponent`. During the simulation user can access names of available spawnables and request spawning using ros2 services. The names of services are `/get_available_spawnable_names` and `/spawn_entity` respectivly. GetWorldProperties.srv and SpawnEntity.srv types are used to handle these features. In order to request defined spawn points names user can use `/get_spawn_points_names` service with `GetWorldProperties.srv` type. Detailed information about specific spawn point (e.g. pose) can be accessed using `/get_spawn_point_info` service with `GetModelState.srv` type. All used services types are defined in gazebo_msgs package.

Reviewer: In the future, it would help the user to have this information separated out into a focused section. What I mean is, this document is focused on providing the user with an overview of ROS 2 concepts and understanding how things work together -- it's all conceptual. In another document, you want to focus on "how to do xyz" and only that. (XYZ can be something general but specific, like "Setting up and using spawners")

It's usually not necessary to go into all of this detail at the high-level because it's easy for the details to get lost. 

```suggestion
`ROS2SpawnerComponent` handles spawning entities during a simulation. Before the simulation, you must set up the available spawnables and define the named spawn points in the component's properties via the **O3DE Editor**. This can be done by adding `ROS2SpawnPointComponent` to a child entity of an entity with `ROS2SpawnerComponent`. During the simulation, you can access the names of available spawnables and request spawning by using ROS 2 services. The names of services are `/get_available_spawnable_names` and `/spawn_entity` respectivly. GetWorldProperties.srv and SpawnEntity.srv types are used to handle these features. In order to request the defined spawn point names, you can use the `/get_spawn_points_names` service with the `GetWorldProperties.srv` type. Detailed information about specific spawn point, such as pose, can be accessed using the `/get_spawn_point_info` service with the `GetModelState.srv` type. All used services types are defined in the **gazebo_msgs** package.
```

> - **Spawning**: The spawnable name must be passed in `request.name` and the position of entity in `request.initial_pose`.

Reviewer: For instructions where the user is taking action, use an [active voice](https://writing.wisc.edu/handbook/style/ccs_activevoice/) ("you") instead of a passive voice.  It clarifies that user is the one taking action. This is especially important to distinguish from actions that happen automatically, or that the users should observe rather than perform.
```suggestion
- **Spawning**: To spawn, you must pass in the spawnable name into `request.name` and the position of entity into `request.initial_pose`.
```

  - Example call: 
  ```
  ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', initial_pose: {position:{ x: 4, y: 4, z: 0.2}, orientation: {x: 0.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0, w:.0}}}
  ```

> - Spawning in defined spawn point: spawnable name should be passed in request.name and the name of the spawn point in request.xml
>   - example call: `ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', xml: 'spawn_spot'}'`
> - Available spawnable names access: names of available spawnables are sent in response.model_names
>   - example call: `ros2 service call /get_available_spawnable_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties`
> - Defined spawn points' names access: names of defined points are sent in response.model_names
>   - example call: `ros2 service call /get_spawn_points_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties`
> - Detailed spawn point info access: spawn point name should be passed in request.model_name. Defined pose is sent in response.pose.
>   - example call: `ros2 service call /get_spawn_point_info gazebo_msgs/srv/GetModelState '{model_name: 'spawn_spot'}'`

Reviewer: To fix formatting, similar to the above
```suggestion
- **Spawning in defined spawn point**: Pass in a spawnable into `request.name` and the name of the spawn point into `request.xml`.
  - Example call: 
    ``` 
    ros2 service call /spawn_entity gazebo_msgs/srv/SpawnEntity '{name: 'robot', xml: 'spawn_spot'}'
    ```
- **Available spawnable names access**: Send the names of available spawnables into `response.model_names`.
  - Example call: 
    ```
    ros2 service call /get_available_spawnable_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties
    ```
- **Defined spawn points' names access**: Send the names of defined points into `response.model_names`
  - Example call: 
    ```
    ros2 service call /get_spawn_points_names gazebo_msgs/srv/GetWorldProperties
    ```
- **Detailed spawn point info access**: Pass in the spawn point name into `request.model_name` and the defined pose into `response.pose`.
  - Example call: 
    ```
    ros2 service call /get_spawn_point_info gazebo_msgs/srv/GetModelState '{model_name: 'spawn_spot'}'
    ```
```

## Structure and Communication

The Gem creates a [ROS 2 node](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/Tutorials/Understanding-ROS2-Nodes.html) which is directly a part of the ROS 2 ecosystem. As such, your simulation will not use any bridges to communicate and is subject to configuration through settings such as Environment Variables. It is truly a part of the ecosystem.

Note that the simulation node is handled through `ROS2SystemComponent` - a singleton. However, you are free to create and use your own nodes if you need more than one.

Typically, you will be creating publishers and subscriptions. This is done through [rclcpp API](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/p/rclcpp/generated/classrclcpp_1_1Node.html#classrclcpp_1_1Node). Example:

```
auto ros2Node = ROS2Interface::Get()->GetNode();
AZStd::string fullTopic = ROS2Names::GetNamespacedName(GetNamespace(), m_MyTopic);
m_myPublisher = ros2Node->create_publisher<sensor_msgs::msg::PointCloud2>(fullTopic.data(), QoS());
```

Note that QoS class is a simple wrapper to [`rclcpp::QoS`](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/p/rclcpp/generated/classrclcpp_1_1QoS.html).

## Components overview

- __Central Singleton__

>   - ROS2SystemComponent

Reviewer 2: I think ROS2SystemComponent  should be in code style.
and others *Component too.

- __Core abstractions__
  - ROS2FrameComponent
  - ROS2SensorComponent
- __Sensors__
  - ROS2CameraSensorComponent
  - ROS2GNSSSensorComponent
  - ROS2IMUSensorComponent
  - ROS2LidarSensorComponent
  - ROS2OdometrySensorComponent
- __Robot control__
  - AckermannControlComponent
  - RigidBodyTwistControlComponent
  - SkidSteeringControlComponent
- __Spawner__
  - ROS2SpawnerComponent
  - ROS2SpawnPointComponent
- __Vehicle dynamics__
  - AckermannVehicleModelComponent
  - SkidSteeringModelComponent
  - WheelControllerComponent
- __Robot Import (URDF) system component__
  - ROS2RobotImporterSystemComponent

See the [class diagram](/docs/user-guide/interactivity/robotics/class-diagram/) to understand how components are connected.

### Frames

> `ROS2FrameComponent` is a representation of an interesting physical part of the robot. It handles spatio-temporal relationship between this part and other frames of reference. It also encapsulates namespaces, which help to distinguish between different robots and different parts of the robot, such in the case of multiple identical sensors on one robot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ROS2FrameComponent` is a representation of an interesting physical part of the robot. It handles the spatio-temporal relationship between this part and other frames of reference. It also encapsulates namespaces, which help to distinguish between different robots and different parts of the robot, such as in the case of multiple identical sensors on one robot.
```

All Sensors and the Robot Control component require `ROS2FrameComponent`.

### Sensors

Sensors are components deriving from `ROS2SensorComponent`. They acquire data from the simulated environment and publish it to ROS 2 domain.

- Each sensor has a configuration, including one or more Publishers.
- Sensors publish at a given rate (frequency).
- Some sensors can be visualized.

If you intend to add your own sensor, it might be useful to look at how sensors already provided within the O3DE ROS2 Gem are implemented.

> Sensors can be fall into one of two categories:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sensors fall into one of two categories:
```

> - sensors which replicate real devices to some degree of realism.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- sensors that replicate real devices to some degree of realism.
```

- ground truth "sensors", which can be useful for development and machine learning.

> 

Reviewer 2: Which sensors fall to second category?

### Robot Control

The Gem comes with `ROS2RobotControlComponent`, which you can use to move your robot through:

- [Twist](https://github.com/ros2/common_interfaces/blob/master/geometry_msgs/msg/Twist.msg) messages.
- [AckermannDrive](https://github.com/ros-drivers/ackermann_msgs/blob/master/msg/AckermannDrive.msg)

>   The component subscribes to these command messages on a configured topic. The topic is "cmd_vel" by default, in a namespace as dictated by ROS2Frame.

Reviewer 2: maybe "cmd_vel" in code style

>   The component subscribes to these command messages on a configured topic. The topic is "cmd_vel" by default, in a namespace as dictated by ROS2Frame.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The component subscribes to these command messages on a configured topic. The topic is `cmd_vel` by default, in a namespace as dictated by __ROS2Frame__.
```

> To make use of received command messages, use either `AckermannControlComponent`, `RigidBodyTwistControlComponent` or `SkidSteeringControlComponent` , depending on steering type. You can also implement your own control component or use LUA scripting to handle these commands. Unless scripting is used, control components should translate ROS 2 commands to events on `VehicleInputControlBus`. These events will be handled by a [`VehicleModelComponent`](#vehicle-model) if it is present. You can use tools such as [rqt_robot_steering](https://index.ros.org/p/rqt_robot_steering/) to move your robot with Twist messages. `RobotControl` is suitable to use with [ROS 2 navigation stack](https://navigation.ros.org/). It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this Component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make use of received command messages, use either `AckermannControlComponent`, `RigidBodyTwistControlComponent`, or `SkidSteeringControlComponent`, depending on the steering type. You can also implement your own control component or use LUA scripting to handle these commands. Unless scripting is used, control components should translate ROS 2 commands to events on `VehicleInputControlBus`. These events will be handled by a [`VehicleModelComponent`](#vehicle-model) if it is present. You can use tools such as [rqt_robot_steering](https://index.ros.org/p/rqt_robot_steering/) to move your robot with Twist messages. `RobotControl` is suitable to use with [ROS 2 navigation stack](https://navigation.ros.org/). It is possible to implement your own control mechanisms with this component.
```

### Vehicle Model

`VehicleModelComponent` serves the purpose of converting inputs such as target velocity, steering or acceleration to physical forces on parts of a vehicle (robot). `VehicleModel` has a `VehicleConfiguration` which is used to define axles, parametrize and assign wheels. The model requires a `WheelControllerComponent` present in each wheel entity. It also uses an implementation of `DriveModel`, which converts vehicle inputs to forces acting on steering elements and wheels.

### Vehicle Dynamics

See the [Vehicle Dynamics](vehicle-dynamics.md) section.

### Spawner

> `ROS2SpawnerComponent` handles spawning entities during simulation. Available spawnables have to be set up as the component's field before the simulation. User is able to define named spawn points inside the Editor. This can be done by adding `ROS2SpawnPointComponent` to a child entity of an entity with `ROS2SpawnerComponent`. During the simulation user can access names of available spawnables and request spawning using ros2 services. The names of services are `/get_available_spawnable_names` and `/spawn_entity` respectivly. GetWorldProperties.srv and SpawnEntity.srv types are used to handle these features. In order to request defined spawn points names user can use `/get_spawn_points_names` service with GetWorldProperties.srv type. Detailed information about specific spawn point (e.g. pose) can be accessed using `/get_spawn_point_info` service with GetModelState.srv type. All used services types are defined in gazebo_msgs package.

Reviewer 2: maybe SpawnEntity.srv and GetWorldProperties.srv in code style
